[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i'm here with james
nester james welcome to the show man
thanks a lot for having me dude i'm
going to be really honest when you were
first pitched as a guest i thought is
there really like a whole book to be
done on breathing is there a whole
episode that we can get out of this
my team made a very compelling case that
i should take a look and the as soon as
i dove into the book i realized that
this was
so much bigger and i'm somebody whose
life has been changed by meditative
breathing for sure and even i thought
that this was a relatively uh narrow
topic your book was a game changer for
me it's already massively influenced how
i approach my day-to-day life
um what was the most surprising thing as
a journalist in diving into the world of
breathing that sort of took you by
surprise
i think the biggest thing for me and i
did not foresee this coming was that
we are anatomically
predisposed to be breathing improperly
and let me sort of unpack that a little
bit
over the past few hundred years our
faces have grown in such a way they've
grown so flat our mouths have grown so
small that we have less room in our
airways to breathe properly and that's
the main reason so many of us have sleep
apnea uh so many of us snore have other
respiratory issues either implicated in
in asthma or allergies and so this was
something i always thought that
breathing was more of a psychological
thing it was you get anxious and that
absolutely affects your breathing but
that it was anatomical and related to
this disevolution that's happened to the
human species absolutely shocked me
and what is the root cause of the diss
evolution what what's going on
it's industrialized foods so
specifically lack of chewing so without
the masticatory stress especially in
youth
you don't develop proper bone structure
you don't develop proper musculature
your mouth tends to grow smaller your
upper palate doesn't fully come down
which means you have an upper palate
like mine
that goes up and punch punctures into
the sinus cavities makes it harder to
breathe through your nose that's why we
have crooked teeth
so uh this was something i had never
heard about and you know i had taken all
the biology evolution classes in college
no one had explained to me why humans
have crooked teeth and every other
animal
doesn't
and so this i thought was very
interesting and those implications of
that small mouth and those crooked teeth
on our breathing is also something i had
no idea about
yeah the implications that is what
really got me interested in your book is
you begin to lay out all the different
things that are touched by this and when
i think about even just how to title
this episode i'm sure it's going to be
something along the lines of like the
way that you're breathing is [__] up
your entire life and the number of
things that can be
i don't say cured but the number of
things that that are impacted
dramatically by
beginning to
change your airways change the shape of
your face which is crazy to think that
you can do that in adulthood
we'll go into these deeply but i'd love
for you to give like just a quick
thumbnail sketch of some of the things
people might be surprised that are
impacted by your breathing by getting
the nasal passages open i didn't know it
was important to breathe through your
nose for instance and just what a few of
those knock-on effects are
so what maladies have been attributed to
poor breathing just look at the top 20
maladies affecting the mass population
right now
metabolic problems diabetes anxiety
issues hypertension
i mean i can keep going gut problems
gerd anxiety panic asthma
they're all related to the ways in which
you breathe that's not to say all of
these conditions are caused by improper
breathing
but the reason why we have them has been
a contributor to poor breeding
especially in sleep apnea which we know
is a cause can cause
metabolic problems like diabetes which
to me just completely blew my mind but
if you think about breathing as the
anchor to all of the different systems
to the body especially inflammation and
if you think if you're doing that
improperly 25 000 times a day your body
is going to compensate because we're
really good at doing that you're going
to stay alive but you're not going to
stay healthy and that's exactly what's
happened to us right now i mean just
sleep apnea and snoring alone people
think it's cute that there's an infant
snoring or that my husband snoring they
gotta sleep on the couch this is someone
who's struggling to breathe during a
third of his or her life if you don't
think that's gonna have a downstream
effect on their health you're crazy and
so much science is now coming out
showing that even though we've known it
for 50 years it's you'd be hard-pressed
to find a researcher who says that's not
going to affect your health in some big
ways
yeah one of the things that i love about
your approach is you come into some of
this with some healthy skepticism which
i am always grateful for
part of the reason that i put off taking
up meditation for as long as i did was
it just felt super woo-woo
it
seemed to be a wash and so much [__]
that i just couldn't bring myself to do
something that felt so soft and
potentially bs
and of course end up doing it and it
ends up you know radically changing my
life and gives me sort of a way to begin
backing out of some of the anxiety that
i had begun to really struggle
profoundly with yeah and and as a my job
as a reporter is not to pick sides with
this stuff it's to go out into the field
talk to the experts in the field look at
the science and come back with the story
so unfortunately i think so much of
meditation and this breathing culture
has been co-opted by people who know it
works or think it works but they don't
bother to really explain how it affects
us all you know they talk about their
own personal journey which is
super helpful and that's really awesome
but to me that doesn't really tell me
anything about my own breathing and my
own body so what i try to do is separate
the wheat from the chaff there and not
to pick any sides but just to go out and
learn to learn as much of this stuff
as i could and i spent several years
doing this you know and it was not easy
i'm not trying to be like some hero's
journey but it's really hard when two
doctors at top institutions are calling
[__] on one another and they're both
published you're like
who do i believe here because there just
has not been that much science in some
of these fringe areas but we do know the
foundation of healthy breathing what we
know that poor breathing can do the body
everyone agrees on that what we know
that healthy breathing can do to the
body how it can help abate symptoms or
sometimes cure
outright cure these chronic problems
we're seeing a burgeoning area of
research there supporting all of those
claims
one thing that i get excited about
whenever people talk about malleability
into adult life i get very excited um as
somebody who can i consider myself a
very late bloomer um i didn't even come
into a growth mindset until i was sort
of about 26. um and so
i worried that my sort of years of
adaptation were behind me and that i was
realizing all of this stuff too late um
talk to me a little bit about free
divers who who are able to do some just
absolutely extraordinary things to their
lung capacity um and then i think also
touching on how much bone you personally
were able to add your face which is
crazy
those two things in terms of what what
ability to somebody who's listening to
this in their 20s 30s 40s
have to really make change
so that was really the jumping off point
for me to write about this book uh when
i first had the idea i was like oh there
might be a book in breathing all my
friends i have a lot of author
journalist friends they were just
mocking me oh you're gonna write a book
about breathing
you know until you start to until you
see a free diver
and so what they're doing these people
have mastered the art of breathing they
were not born this way these are people
through just the power of will
doesn't matter if they were small
doesn't matter if they were tall large
doesn't matter what country the ethnic
background no no no through the force of
will
they mastered this skill to hold their
breath six seven eight minutes at a time
to dive the depths of 300 400 feet no
fins just
just the the natural human body two lung
fulls of air that's it and i went out
with outside magazine this was years and
years ago saw this i said oh my god what
else don't we know about our human
body's of potential what else have we
forgotten because we have archaeological
evidence that people have been
freedoming for at least 10 000 years
whoa right so so they've been
they've been diving down well past 100
feet for this long and so this isn't
something like some you know westerners
decided to do as a stunt this is part of
what i believe has made us the species
we are now so if we've forgotten that
what else have we forgotten and how is
it attached to breath so that was really
a jumping off point for me to look into
the terrestrial plane i know what free
diving does underwater i'm a free diver
myself i've seen it i've felt it i've
experienced it how long can you stand
under water on a single breath how long
can you stay underwater so this is a
question i'm gonna be purposely
vague about because
where people get in trouble is when
they're watching their their watch and
they're like ah i went down 150 feet
yesterday i'm going to go down 160. i
was down for four minutes yesterday i'm
gonna stay down for five body changes
every day so depending on what you eat
how you slept you have to listen to your
body not your watch
so having said that big bold caveat
there people i've had other people that
have been with me and i've stayed about
four four minutes which is and that was
after
a few weeks of training and that that is
uh not a very significant four four
minutes after a few weeks yeah
but at that point what's the adaptation
that's such a short period of time is it
lung capacity is it psychological like
um what what is actually going on at a
physiological level
mostly psychological so i've seen within
the first workshop i did i went from
holding my breath at the beginning about
40 seconds i was like that's that's
pretty good
one workshop two hours later two and a
half minutes right out the door and and
everyone that was in this workshop was
doing the same thing more more than me
so it's it's been is that is that
learning how to deal with co2 and the
panic that it creates absolutely so it
does it does relate to
psychological mental much more than
physical because we can go a long time
holding our breath so
that need to breathe is not dictated by
a lack of oxygen right now if you exhale
hold your breath you're going to feel
that nagging need to breathe that's from
an increase of co2 so what you're doing
is understanding what's happening in
your body
understanding that your body is not
screaming out for oxygen you're just
acclimated to a lower threshold of co2
and so once you get your mind around
that then it becomes a body mind thing
yeah more lung capacity that's good but
it's mostly tolerating that increase of
co2 okay so if you were
right now sort of all the caveats in the
world but you're sort of roughly four
minutes um what's the world record for
free diving specifically
twelve and a half minutes whoa
how deep
this is at the surface
there's this competition called static
breath holding where you put your head
underneath the surface and you hold your
breath
and then people do it with oxygen
so and that the record for that is 21
minutes with but that's hyperventilating
with oxygen so just the natural body
with pure oxygen like they they have
some sort of
okay well they they they have
hyperventilate fill their entire lungs
with pure oxygen go under
what about free diving is that is that
based on depth and not time
there's different
disciplines to free diving there's
static breath hold which is just head
under water yep and then there's depth
so most of them are associated with
depth there's depth without fins there's
depth with fins there's depth with
machines there's depth with machines
that don't have motors on them i mean on
and on all these different disciplines
but i watched a guy go down
830 feet i'm sorry
830 feet down in greece
herbert nitch i was i was there uh it
did not end up well for him it was awful
and at that point i said i will never
see any freediving competition again
i don't want to
this to cloud my vision of something
that is so beautiful and so part of who
we are as a species and so i that was my
jumping off point for competitive
freediving versus the more meditative
and yoga side of it all right before we
get to the yogic side which has better
benefits i want to know what happened to
him in what way was it terrible
he had numerous strokes
oh god while he was underwater uh he he
blacked out uh right from the get-go he
was on the sled you can see this 80 60
minutes was there i mean it was just a
complete [__] show i said why why am i
here why am i reporting on this and he
took the sled down which propelled him
down it's supposed to go down 800 feet
went down 830.
he came up and if you come up that
quickly he was supposed to stop about 30
feet below the surface
and equalize he didn't he shot straight
up
and uh he was rushed to the hospital and
he's still suffering from the problems
associated with that he's a lot better
now but
he
you know obviously he regrets this and
that to me just showed
listen i love people can do whatever
they want they can compete that's badass
that's none of my business but i just i
saw what happens when the western mind
focuses on one thing as opposed to the
larger picture which is we've been
gifted this incredible body to do these
incredible things
don't step too far over that line or
you're going to get hurt and that's
exactly what i saw
i don't want to derail this too much but
i i am very curious to hear more you
said when the western mind
focuses on one narrow thing which that
detached from that story i would say ooh
tell me more that sounds amazing i want
to focus on something like that um what
are you uh bifurcating eastern western
and what is sort of the pathological
part of the well first define the
western mindset for me if you would and
then obviously that's a good example of
sort of where it goes pathological but
i'd love to to hear more about how you
view that if that is the dichotomy i'm
absolutely bifurcating those two things
because about six months after that i
went to japan
and i met with the ama women divers
they've been diving deep in the ocean
for two thousand years fifteen hundred
years and they do it as a spiritual
practice they also do it to gather food
because they believe that the earth will
stay in harmony if you only take what
you can carry out of the ocean the ocean
will always provide and they've been
doing this for a long time so i met with
women in their 70s one was over 80 years
old she had been diving every day free
diving every single day rain
shine snow doesn't matter these were the
most fit
badass women i've ever seen not only
physically fit
mentally so sharp i went out there to
dive with them i wasn't very good at
that time but they were just kicking 80
year old just kicking my ass over and
coming out with an octopus holding a
knock putting in her bag you know coming
out with abalone and
their appreciation for the ocean
and their place within the ocean really
resonated with me is that yeah you can
push limits that's that's what people do
but you also have to understand and
appreciate your limits and also
understand that the ocean is always
going to win if you challenge it you
have to understand and be humble within
the ocean and when i heard that it made
a lot more sense to me than hearing this
western approach which was disregarding
so much of that the feelings inside of
your body
our position in our place in our
appreciation
with the ocean and just trying to get
the metal at the end so i think there's
a way of bridging those two things gear
uh jeremy neary french freediver very
spiritual guy
also complete badass competitor no
longer competes because he found himself
being taken too far into that other
world
that's really interesting um
i want to know more about these women
what what depth are we talking about and
what do they wear
so i was i went out there i said i'm a
free diver
custom made free diving suit brand new
goggles
snork huge fins i was like i gotta like
you know show them i'm serious about
this
they're in these ripped up old scuba
wetsuits which are awful for freedom
holes in the back stitched up they're
wearing those masks like this those big
circular masks
their snorkels barely work they're
wearing boogie board fins they're
probably 30 years old
so they were probably diving to depths
100 feet 120 but but again it's not
that's they would never come back and be
like how deep did you dive oh i did 100
today they're like how'd that die feel
how did you enjoy that what food were
you able to take from the ocean how
nurturing was that and to me
that seems like a much better game plan
for a long life and appreciation of
yourself and your place on this planet
than this i'm gonna kick the ocean's ass
i'm going to go as hard as i can
if i die i die
again if people want to do that totally
that's not my business
but personally i was much more attracted
to the story and the culture on this
other side and that's what i mean by the
western eastern approach
all right now i want to get use that as
an example to better understand some of
the benefits of what's going on so
the
if somebody asked me to explain what
about your book like
literally stop me in my tracks and make
me rethink everything that i'm doing
it's it's the notion of you need to
breathe less
and that was so that gave me the chills
just saying that and when when i read it
it had that same impact of like whoa is
it possible that i've just approached
this whole thing all wrong and that the
things that i think are giving me
benefits it actually isn't the the
inhalation it's the exhalation and the
hold and the learning to manage co2 and
understanding that co2 is actually
important and not just a byproduct
why is this woman in her 80s so fit is
it the swimming is it the holding her
breath for extended periods of time and
look i get it's going to be a gestalt of
many of these things but why is holding
your breath important and do you think
it plays a factor in being 80 and being
able to be such a badass
i think it does because breath holding
and breathing just like so many other
aspects in life come down to flexibility
you want to be able to be flexible so
populations who have panic and who have
asthma traditionally you ask them to
hold their breath i've seen this
they aren't flexible their threshold for
co2 is very low so i a general gauge of
health and this is not a very clear
scientific diagnostic that has been used
for a long time
is they'd have doctors to have patients
come in exhale softly and hold their
breath
and a lot of people use this to see how
they're feeling day to day i was just
talking to bill bradley the senator who
ran for president way back when every
single morning he he wakes up and holds
his breath
he can tell how well he's slept he can
tell what food he's eaten how well he's
digested that it's a good general gauge
and breath holding has been part of
breathing the practice of breathing for
thousands and thousands of years an
early translation for pranayama was a
trance induced by breath holding
all right so
one of the things that i am still
perplexed by how important it seems to
be
is breathing through the nose
i would classify myself as a chronic
mouth breather i catch myself doing it
all the time
i
i want to know why does it matter so
much
and what are the benefits if somebody
were to
go to lengths to train themselves to
breathe almost exclusively through the
nose
so if you were to cut my head in half
and i've done this with a with a cat
scan and gotten a deli slicer view of my
whole head
you're gonna see that the nose here and
the sinus passages take up about the
volume of a billiard ball sometimes even
more than that so this is an incredibly
ornate and complex organ that looks so
much like a seashell they call it the
nasal concha so sea shells they use
their shells the organisms within there
to keep out pathogens and to filter
stuff out that's exactly what our noses
do so air doesn't just shoot in into our
nose into our throat we have to force it
through this gauntlet of turbinates
and mucosa and cilia and all of these
different structures and while air is
being pressurized and forced through
this labyrinth it is moistened
it's heated
it's filtered
it's pressurized and it's conditioned so
that by the time it enters our lungs we
can better absorb that oxygen so just
breathing equivalent breaths
through the nose then through the mouth
will increase oxygenation about 20
percent with each breath so that's
caused by a number of things also nitric
oxide uh i'm sure a lot of your
listeners know about nitro this wondrous
molecule that does
uh is implicated with uh with
vasodilation
it helps with gas exchange it's
essential we make six times more
no when we breathe through our nose if
we hum
we make 15 floor fold more nitric oxide
nitric oxide is also
some people may be interested in knowing
this that what does viagra do it
stimulates the release of nitric oxide
in our bodies creates vasodilation
uh you know where so we can we can do
this in our in our noses as well
and if i remember right from your book
there's actually um basically erectile
tissue
in your nasal cavity
why on earth would that be true
well i don't know how it got there but
we do know it's there so the nose is
more closely connected to the genitals
than any other organ what do you mean by
that
anatomically
uh their connection in the way that they
both use uh erectile tissue which
engorges with blood
which inflates it and makes it firm and
also
when that blood releases it makes it
flaccid so each of your nostrils has a
coating of erectile tissue
and throughout the day
one nostril will become more engorged
with blood
and gently plug up and become more left
nostril dominant after about 30 minutes
to three or four hours
the other nostril will switch sometimes
they're both open but it's usually they
call it a nostril dominance so the
everyone was just like why the hell does
do our bodies do this why would we do
this it turns out and there's 20 years
of studies showing this when we breathe
through our right nostril
body heat increases heart rate increases
circulation increases this is associated
with a stimulating effect okay and it
activates the left side of the head
of the brain more which is associated
more with logical functions i know that
there's a bunch of crossover but
these are blanket explanations right now
left nostril breathing calming effect
heart rate goes down you relax more
associated with creative functions
so our bodies do this
automatically throughout the day you can
hack this alternate nostril breathing
anyone who's taken a yoga class
okay but our bodies are already doing
this and if you're breathing through the
mouth you're getting zero of these
benefits so we are made we are designed
to breathe through our noses and the
fact that 25 to 50 of us aren't doing
this i believe
is causing us a bunch of undue stress
and potentially
is contributing to a bunch of more
serious issues
the fact that our noses
close one side and open the other is
this this is one of those things where
i
and i think many many many other people
have felt like we're sort of living at
the end of history that we're living at
the end of evolution like we understand
everything that there are precious views
sort of mysteries left
um and then you begin to realize that
that just is not true the number of
things that we do not yet understand
about the human body and so we go in and
we remove things like the appendix and
think that you don't really need an
appendix and then oh [__] wait there's
this whole thing called the microbiome
maybe it actually does matter um and
then the getting into the notes do until
i picked up your book i'm in my 40s man
until i picked up your book i had no
idea that any of this mattered somebody
told me a couple years ago that um
breathing depending on what side of the
nose you breathe through would actually
have an impact and i was like
like that sounded like the biggest load
of crap
ever it sounded so ridiculous to me
and now it's like i'm training myself to
have this mechanism where it's like the
second you want to reject something hit
the pause button because man there's so
many things we don't understand and i
have a feeling that on that one the fact
that we have erectile tissue in our
noses so that
at least one of them seems to be so that
we can do this cycle thing um that we
may find that there are other things
that are tied to this so walk me now
through
you've gone to great lengths to be able
to breathe through your nose um you've
certainly inspired me to begin breathing
through my nose so okay we're moistening
it we're warming it or cooling it
because i think we if we're in a sauna
or something we're certainly not
scorching our lungs so something is
happening um
what ends up happening to people you did
you did something where you
intentionally plugged your nose for 10
days what ends up happening when you
plug your nose
yeah so
i couldn't believe all this stuff i was
finding either right uh and and i really
mean this but luckily i'm in san
francisco i'm very close to stanford i
got to be good friends with dr jack or
nyack who is the chief of rhinology
research at stanford so he's the one
telling me this stuff this guy publishes
like 30 papers a year he's a monster
and
if it's coming from him and it's coming
with 30 papers i'm like okay it's legit
i mean this guy's
top of his class um so he was also
explaining something else that nasal
hairs and this is a little pragmatic tip
for people people obsessed with pulling
out their nasal hairs they found that
there is a significantly higher
um chance that you will have asthma that
you will be suffering from asthma the
less dense your nasal hairs are so the
more we have this stuff for re this
helps filter air and slow it down
so the idea that people are just like
pulling all this pulling appendixes out
you know pulling all this stuff out
saying oh what what
we got to get rid of this stuff why do
we need this i think nature is a better
gauge of
how we need something how important it
is to us so that's a long way of saying
i started talking to nayak he's just
like oh man the no no one's breathing
out of the nose and it's causing
periodontal disease it's causing all of
these other issues and i said well how
how quickly does this damage come on
does it do i have to be a mouthful
either for 10 years 20 years
for a month he didn't know so he's like
well there haven't been any studies done
on it so it's like you're you're at
stanford man why don't why don't you do
something you're like the top lab in the
world why don't you do some studies on
it but he's like oh i don't have any
funding allocated blah blah blah so i
finally convinced him i said let's let's
do an experiment you you can collect all
the data um it'll be me
and i convinced anders olsen who's a
breathing therapist from sweden who's so
dedicated to his craft he's been
teaching this stuff for 10 years he's
like
i can't rightfully go and teach people
this without knowing the full story so
he
he spent his own money to fly to san
francisco for a month to have his
freaking nose plugged up and it was
awful so so for ten days uh we plugged
our noses and we did uh pft's pulmonary
function tests we did cats i mean
everything blood work everything you
could imagine in our home lab we had
about
10 grand 15 grand of equipment that we
had managed to either get donated or
cobbled together heart rate variability
co2 oxygen temperature everything you
can imagine and so what we were doing
wasn't like this
stunt in in my opinion we were lulling
ourselves into a position that 25 to 50
percent of the population already knew
but we were measuring what happened
and within the first night didn't take
long for us to see how damaging this was
i went from not snoring to snoring an
hour and a half it's like [__] that that
sucks start feeling really really awful
anxiety you know i was like oh
psychosomatic whatever next night
snoring even more three days later
snoring for four hours started getting
sleep apnea started recording ourselves
i mean our health just
instantly went to hell when anders
suffered even worse than i did right
right off the bat and the day we took
these plugs out
it all disappeared
so i just don't hear too many people
talking about just the pathway through
which we breathe
how that can contribute to snoring and
sleep apnea but they're starting to now
i've received you know hundreds of
emails of people saying i'm just
breathing through my nose now i'm
putting a little piece of tape here i'm
no longer snoring why why didn't someone
tell me this 30 years ago
and i don't have an answer for that but
you know it's it's curious
there there is something to the fact
that like you said we have
archaeological evidence people have been
free diving for 10 000 years um for
thousands of years people have been
practicing yoga and other breathing
techniques um and the subhead of your
book is i'm going to paraphrase but like
the wisdom we had lost and you know now
we're sort of getting it back it's a
terrible paraphrase
science of the lost art no there we go
the ballpark
so
what
one
i know you just said that you you don't
really have a take on why we don't know
this anymore but i'm so curious like
how this stuff fell out of favor and are
there other things that you know people
are like tumult for instance
what is it what are some of these like
wisdoms that you have a sense or or
maybe we already have some data that
back up that it is real and it's you
know something that people could begin
deploying now
i think so much of it has been clouded
in bs i think honestly that's that's the
reason same reason why someone comes up
to you and says oh breathe out this
nostril does this you're just like yeah
[__] anyway moving on
because we're we're apprehensive and
we're skeptical for good reason we've
been told a bunch of of garbage for so
long from both sides really from the
more new agey side and even from the
medical institutions how how often were
we told that eating high carb high sugar
food was was totally fine you know
having a bowl of tricks every morning
that's a good way of starting your day
end it with a manwich i mean we we know
that that's complete garbage now but it
took us 30 years the science has always
been there but it took us 30 years to be
like wait a second this is wrong and it
didn't come from these institutions it
came from people
turning into a high protein diet high
fat diet and saying i just lost 20
pounds in a month and i'm not hungry you
know it came by people actually trying
this stuff out luckily now there's so
much science showing all of the benefits
from from these things especially in
nutrition but i think breathing is on
that same path where nobody disproved
this stuff we just moved on to other
things so an example of that is we're
talking about co2 the importance of co2
having more co2 in your body breathing
more slowly they knew this 100 years ago
yandell henderson at yale was
administering co2 with oxygen to people
who had strokes or heart attacks or
infants who had exfixia and this stuff
worked wonderfully and then it was just
forgotten about and someone developed
some other machine that they thought
could do the same thing so i don't want
to point fingers this is just human
progress this is how we do it but it is
interesting that there's this foundation
of three thousand four thousand years of
this technology of breathing every
culture it doesn't matter if you're
looking at the ancient greeks ancient
chinese ancient indians they were all
really into breathing and they had these
very elaborate systems to breathe well
we have we have instruments now to
measure this stuff and the great thing
about breathing is it's so easy to
measure you know it doesn't it doesn't
take much you can breathe in a certain
way in a minute later you can see what
happens to your heart rate variability
you can see what happens to your blood
pressure or your oxygen or your co2 and
so once you actually see that and
experience it and learn about how there
is this huge foundation of science out
there it's it's irrefutable
and and it's always been there but i
think that we've just been our view has
been clouded by so much other stuff
people
come up with some new hacks you don't
have to worry about breathing take take
this pill and then 10 years later
they're like oh actually don't take that
pill it's really hurting your body you
know it's allowing the body to enter a
state where it can heal itself which is
what it's doing every minute of every
day but we need to allow our bodies to
do more of that and that to me is really
the core of what breathing allows us to
do
tulmont seems to me to be um something
that shows just how crazy and powerful
breathing can be when i first heard
about this stuff
i wanted to believe it because i want to
believe in anything that makes a person
sound like a superhuman but if i'm
honest when i heard about them sitting
in the snow and melting the snow or them
being able to change the temperature on
the same hand one part of the hand would
be warmer than the other part i was like
um
how real is it
and
is there one specific type of breathing
that is tulmont or
like
is it something else
so i had heard these stories as well and
the literature on tumor goes back the
the ability to heat yourself up with
your breath goes back for thousands of
years
about a thousand years ago this guy
naropa um discovered it in a cave in
himalayas but there aren't video you
know there's no videos of him doing it
there were no scientific measurements of
it then this woman named alexandra david
neal a french woman who in her 40s went
on this spiritual sojourn throughout the
himalayas for 14 years which is pretty
unheard of in in the 1900s she
discovered it as well and she's like oh
yeah whenever i got cold i just do what
the monks do they have a single sheet on
they just
breathe in the certain way everyone
called [__] on that right as
rightfully as as they should when a lot
of hippies started going to india and
tibet in the 60s they came back with
these stories they're like no really
there's these monks who sit outside all
night in a single sheet and they breathe
in a way to melt a circle around them in
the snow and then they go
and they go back into the monastery so
herbert benson
at harvard so he was at harvard medical
school heard enough of these stories
he's like okay i need to go figure this
thing out this was in 1980. so he went
out to dharamsala in india and got some
of these monks hooked them up and
there's video of this hooked them up
with all kinds of sensors and found that
they can absolutely do this so in a cold
room he put a wet sheet over them
they breathe in this certain way that
they dried the sheet their their body
temperature went up 17 degrees they
never suffered from hypothermia or
frostbite or any of these problems so
this is in 1980 still people were like
oh this is [__] man he was measuring
it all wrong then wim hof comes around
he's like oh yeah okay
well i'm gonna sit in an ice bath for
two hours okay in front of all of you
and my core temperature's not gonna go
down i'm not gonna get hypothermia i'm
not gonna get frostbite and explain that
and i think you know we have him to
thank for just shutting up so many
people even though the science was there
from harvard that was published in
nature people are still like uh whatever
those are weirdos in india so now people
are learning this tumo and they're
finding that it not only can allow you
to heat your body up and not get
hypothermia in these extreme cold
conditions but it can help reset your
immune system it can help people with
autoimmune diseases which i think is
it's real gift it's cool to be able to
warm yourself on on command that's
amazing but to be able to help people
for whom no other therapy could help is
is i think so important and and so to
answer your question
this is a question i i could not answer
uh and i kept talking to people i was
like well wim hof is going
like you really go for it but if you
look at these these tumor monks they are
they're hardly moving and benson found
that they were able to decrease their
metabolism
more than 60 percent the lowest number
ever recorded and yet by decreasing
their metabolism they could superheat
their bodies and no one has any idea how
they were able to do this so we have a
better idea on how wim is able to do it
right
you're stimulating a stress response
you're really getting that circulation
going then you're holding your breath so
you've gone from offloading co2 to
increasing co2 that releases oxygen you
can increase your metabolism and he's
even shown an hour after doing his
practices his metabolisms off the hook
so you're using more oxygen that way but
there are so many mysteries here how can
those monks do what they do
and when i've asked researchers they
just say
that's interesting not sure anyway
here's this research we do know
and those are the corners i really like
to to open and peer into because they
show
the true potential of our bodies and how
much we've lost these these monks aren't
using some new technology stuff's been
around for thousands of years and we
still can't understand it even with all
the modern technologies we have
yeah the the thing that i find so
enticing about whim
is
he's talking about basically taking
these autonomic functions and bringing
them into i can't remember if he
specifically says conscious control but
he certainly makes it seem like yeah i i
know you're injecting me with this
endotoxin e coli
and so i'm revving up my immune system
i'm sending it out to attack it and shut
it down
and that to me is is the the frontier
that i'm
very
um eager for people to continue to
explore because you know how much of
this can we bring into our conscious
control and
is it all going to be through breathing
is there another you know frontier that
we have sort of equally ignored for
however many millennia we've been
ignoring like the real power of the
breath
and i heard something once that
really resonated with me as soon as i
started meditating which is that the the
diaphragm is the um
the center of the warrior or the seat of
the warrior forget the exact word but
it's like
the the core of a warrior is their their
diaphragm and i thought you know why
would that be and then i took my first
diaphragmatic breath and realized whoa
like this has this immediate impact on
my ability to shift data sympathetic
into parasympathetic
and i'm curious if we know
with too much like what's going on at a
cellular level like when they're heating
themselves up i understand the wim hof
method because
it's
in revving up your
your metabolism you're
you're essentially
igniting the furnace inside of you to
burn calories basically to get this
uncoupling
to generate the heat i don't understand
it when it's
slowing something down and was the
research that was done in the 80s does
it give us any hints as to what that is
it does not and this is a question at
the end of the book i was i was saying
there are still mysteries to to behold
here so just as you had said with wim
hof with this intense breathing
i can probably make myself sweat by
doing that so it's just more more
kindling on the fire right you just have
more fuel so you're you're burning it
but i would love if they looked at atp
of these monks in in these like are they
able to to trick their bodies to produce
more heat because all of that's coming
from
the production of the atp right electron
transport chain that that's where heat
is coming from and in water as well so
are they able to activate more i don't i
don't think it's measurable maybe
there's a neurologist or neuroscientist
out there who who thinks it is and if so
man give me a call let's let's find some
of these guys and check it out
but he was he was measuring what was
happening to them externally he was not
measuring what was happening to in
inside of their bodies and that to me is
where where the real mystery and magic
would be because we know these people
can do this uh you know people have been
calling bs on it for so long they're not
anymore because these studies have been
published in the top scientific journals
and there's videotape of it you know you
can see it for you for yourself
but i just don't see personally beyond
the the few researchers that i was
fortunate enough to work with there's
just not a lot of interest in this stuff
especially now we're in a pandemic
people are like what superheated monks
it's the last thing we're thinking about
like we got to get get rid of this this
corona virus then we'll go back to that
so so my answer to you is is they don't
know and i don't know
what you were just saying about people
not being interested during coronavirus
that is a very bizarre response to me
when you talk about something that could
have an immune system function uh and
that we're not breathing through our
noses which hey by the way is shaped
like a conch shell as a way to get rid
of pathogens like this all seems pretty
important
yeah and and guess what else breathing
can do can and can very quickly decrease
inflammation guess what cobit does
it increases this massive inflammation
throughout your body so there's a whole
protocol that's being developed by dr
steven porges where he's like looking
for this miracle cure is going to be
hard what we have to do is focus on your
body you need to focus on your breathing
you need to focus on your nutrition
that's how you're going to protect
yourself i don't want to wade into these
these waters and have someone say you
know i was breathing correctly i got
covered you know you're full of [__]
which happens by the way
when you write a book about breathing
but i think the important thing is to
know that to bolster your body's
defenses to focus on your breathing can
absolutely have a profound effect on on
your immune function we've seen that
taking a few easy breaths right can can
release constriction in the rest of your
body you can breathe really fast your
fingers are going to get tingly your
head is going to get light because
that's caused by constriction not an
increase of oxygenation so we can
decrease
inflammation rapidly and and profoundly
by changing our breathing habits in in
what way
specifically around inflammation
with vasodilation so so that's what
when we're breathing more calmly so what
happens when we are eliciting a
sympathetic response so we're shuffling
all this blood to areas that we need to
fight or run away from something the
brain the heart the skeletal muscles
right to be really strong when we calm
ourselves down all those other channels
come back online and inflammation is
decreased that's why when we breathe
slowly
you take some very calm breaths you rate
about a count of about five or six
and breathe out to that same count after
a few minutes there's a good chance
you're going to start to feel your
fingers heat up and your toes heat up
that's from an increase of circulation
from a decrease of inflammation in those
areas you talked about that in your book
so i tried it um and i'm curious when
you say to in the book you specifically
say 5.5 seconds is sort of the magic
breathe in for 5.5 breathe out for 5.5
um
does that include the sort of hold so
like when i exhale i then hold then when
i breathe in i hold if i include those
periods of i'm not technically breathing
in anymore and i'm not technically
breathing out anymore i can hit 5.5
otherwise i can't i'm about two and a
half seconds in and then two and a half
seconds out am i doing it wrong
no
and just to be clear that 5.5 is a
general gauge
so the last thing anyone should be doing
is getting a stopwatch and being like
four to seven four to eight
you know anything in that range
can be very therapeutic in the
neighborhood of five to six breaths is
great and we know that that the science
is five to six second breaths five to
six seconds
which is yes which is five to six
breaths at uh a minute right that's
that's what it works out too i say 5.5
because it's easy to remember
5.5 inhale 5.5 exhale 5.5 breaths a
minute that's that's how it all works
out so when when we do this we are
allowing just the right amount of oxygen
to come in at just the right amount of
time with the least effort so so that's
why the heart rate will slow down that's
why circulation will increase and our
bodies want this to constantly be
pushing our bodies especially in states
of recovery
is a bad idea
so so i think that that general gauge
and we've we've seen this in studies
where they've taught people with panic
and asthma who who traditionally breathe
way too much i'm talking off the charts
20 breaths of men
through the mouth they the only
intervention they had them do was slow
down their breathing and their symptoms
were rapidly reduced by a profound level
even within a year later after four
weeks of this training so this is what
happens when the body comes into a state
of homeostasis where it's able to do
what it's supposed to do
i'm guessing your answer is going to be
something like it depends on what you're
trying to accomplish but is there a
right way to breathe i'll say for just
sort of everyday
um
everyday health
yeah
what what would that right way look like
well sit sitting on a couch is different
than than sprinting right so you're
gonna be breathing in different ways so
what i tried to do instead of focusing
on like
you get a book on on pranayama there's
300 different ways of bri all of these
crazy names like where do i start i just
try to focus on the umbrella
items here right you're going to want to
breathe slowly you're going to want to
breathe through your nose you're going
to want to breathe less many of us are
going to want to breathe less to get
more
and
you know you're going to want to chew
your food that's a whole other thing
because that can help open up your
airway but patrick mcewen pretty well
known breathing therapist told me this
which totally blew my mind he found
studies where people who breathe at a
rate of about 20 breaths a minute so the
average what's considered normal is 12
to 18 breaths a minute so 20 breaths a
minute is maybe even on the low end for
populations with anxiety and asthma
all they're doing is bringing air here
and getting it out that means they can
only use 50 percent of that air
okay because they're filling up their
throats they're filling up their mouths
they're filling up the bronchus all of
these areas can't participate in gas
exchange so they're just wasting air
bringing it in bringing it out only 50
percent at that rate when you when
you're taking it six liters a minute if
you slow that down to 12 breaths per
minute you're taking in 70 percent okay
you're that's how much more efficient
you are 70 20 different incredible if
you breathe at a rate of six breaths a
minute you have an 85
efficiency in your breathing so that's
how much more oxygen you're going to be
able to get which means you can breathe
less while getting more oxygen which
again is that's the key whether or not
you're you're sitting on a couch and
want to recover or whether or not you're
really working out because if you're
breathing in lines with your metabolic
needs that means you're going to have
that much more energy to go even further
if your heart rate is lower at states of
zone three zone four or whatever then
you can push your heart rate even more
go further and farther and dr john
dewyard has been studying this stuff for
40 years works with top ultra
marathoners triathletes olympians
and that's that's what he's found so uh
that that those his books and his
science i thought were so fascinating
and they're really supported by so much
of the newer research that's coming out
now so let's go back to chewing for a
second so
um
how can i now make some of these changes
do i just find food that's really
difficult to chew
do i need a device on my face like what
do i do to open up my airways
so chewing is something when we lost
that ability to chew because of
industrialized foods our mouths are all
messed up they look a lot like mine i
had braces extractions wisdom teeth out
headgear all that crap and i was
convinced that in middle age i was just
screwed right so i screwed up when i was
young i was hosed the rest of the time
and i learned from various researchers
that's not the case we have our throat
is basically a muscle tube okay so the
less we
use it the more flabby it's going to get
just like any other muscle so there are
exercises you can do i won't take you
through all these some of them are quite
involved of pushing the tongue up to the
roof of the mouth
sucking the tongue up there do this 30
times a day they found in research that
this has a profound effect on snoring
and sleep apnea by just making your
throat more fit you can also do this by
chewing chewing has other benefits
beyond just helping to open your airways
it helps drain the eustachian tube it
increases blood flow to the brain it
releases a parasympathetic state it
induces that in your body that's how
saliva comes on paris so there's so many
benefits to chewing if you think about
all the crap we're eating nowadays even
the stuff we think is healthy y'all
yogurt soft foods avocados smoothies
there's zero chewing so that's a long
way of saying yeah you can chew food as
long as you don't have a tmj problem and
i need to put out that caveat now
because people have written me saying my
tmj hurts i've had tmj issues if your
mouth is messed up have it checked out
and fix that but for those who don't
have those issues chewing has so many
benefits and i've seen so i did a little
side experiment as part of the book is
to see if i could improve this this uh
debilitated middle-aged face in airways
and i showed massive improvements and
the cat scans show this not just me
saying hey i feel better you look at the
cat scans about 15 to 20 percent
increase in in airway tone and airway
size plus and granulation from my
sinuses is gone and i'm breathing better
than than i ever had i built bone
through this palatal expander we're told
that we can't build bone past 30 wrong
we can do it we can do it in our faces
and i i added about five pennies worth
of bone in my face
so
so the human body is very malibu
malleable it's uh it's this amazing
mechanism i think that we've haven't
been utilizing it to its full potential
for so long we've been convinced that
pills and potions can do everything but
you got to do the work sometimes and
that will that will have its benefits in
a big way
my man dude speaking of doing the work
thank you for writing that book
absolutely extraordinary where can
people find out more about you where can
they get the book
at
mrjamesnester.com some other joke jerk
took james and esther so there's an mr
on there uh the whole bibliography is
there there's about 500 scientific
references there's also
q and a's with experts in the field on
breathing from harvard and other
universities i'm also on instagram
trying to get better at the social media
thing um i'm only posting about
breathing there so no no pictures of
like my breakfast or my dog or anything
just just breathing stuff research stuff
my man
again thank you so much for coming on
the show your book was really trans
transformational for me i hope people
dive way into it um i think it's going
to be a game changer so thank you for
pushing all of that forward making
people more aware uh much obliged
everybody if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
being non-stimulative in our behavior we
lost the connection in the depth of our
physiology because we are able to adapt
about to anything
you